add google season of docs 2024 propsal (#950)
NixOS/nix.dev: maintainers/google-season-of-docs-2024.md

> # Write Nix docker and cross compilation guides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Google Season of Docs 2024: Write Nix docker and cross compilation guides
```

## What is Nix (about us)

Nix is the purely functional package manager emphasizing reproducibility and reliability.

> Our first release was in 2003, we are one of the ten largest projects on GitHub for multiple consecutive years now and have a vast variety of contributors from all over the world, totaling up to over 5000 individuals. Nix finds applications in any sector using IT, with examples reaching from finances, agriculture and research to energy providers, space exploration and high performance computing. We drastically improve our users computing experience and have a unique approach to problems.

Author: > we have been one of the ten largest projects on GitHub

As far as I'm aware we still are one the ten largest projects on GitHub.

> with more than 15 000 users

15 000 users is honestly a very low assumption, esp. if you take in metrics like the ones [here](https://github.com/NixOS/infra/tree/master/metrics/fastly) which show that the nix installer alone gets downloaded around ~50k per day and we constantly have more then 200k individual nix users hit the cache. We obviously can't take those values at face because existing users updating are mixed in to the download number and on average every nix user probably has more then one machine because companies running their dc on nix are included in those numbers.

> Our first release was in 2003, we are one of the ten largest projects on GitHub for multiple consecutive years now and have a vast variety of contributors from all over the world, totaling up to over 5000 individuals. Nix finds applications in any sector using IT, with examples reaching from finances, agriculture and research to energy providers, space exploration and high performance computing. We drastically improve our users computing experience and have a unique approach to problems.

Reviewer: "have been" means it's still happening.

## What is our Project

One of nix's superpowers is being able to take existing build instructions and transforming them into almost any output, with support for multiple platforms (Linux, macOS, FreeBSD), architectures (x86, aarch64, riscv, etc ...) and formats (statically linked binaries, docker/oci-images, APKs, appimages, and many more). Sadly the process for building anything but a binary native to your system is barely documented.

> As of recently there was quite a large spike in cpu architecture diversity with apple's M* processor series switching from x86 to aarch64, chromebooks offering both x86 and aarch64 computing options to people and vendors like HetznerCloud offering cheaper aarch64 machines. This intern created a higher demand for cross compilation support and nix excels at cross compilation on the technical site of things.

Author: What's wrong with the examples?

> As of recently there was quite a large spike in cpu architecture diversity with apple's M* processor series switching from x86 to aarch64, chromebooks offering both x86 and aarch64 computing options to people and vendors like HetznerCloud offering cheaper aarch64 machines. This intern created a higher demand for cross compilation support and nix excels at cross compilation on the technical site of things.

Reviewer: It's too much stuff for the introduction IMO

> As of recently there was quite a large spike in cpu architecture diversity with apple's M* processor series switching from x86 to aarch64, chromebooks offering both x86 and aarch64 computing options to people and vendors like HetznerCloud offering cheaper aarch64 machines. This intern created a higher demand for cross compilation support and nix excels at cross compilation on the technical site of things.

Author: Okay fair enough, I applied your suggestions.

Looking at the Google Analytics for Nix and websites like https://nix.dev/ reveals that one of the most sought after topics is how to build a docker container from a nix package. This is no wonder considering that oci images became the defacto standard to share software between platforms with many service providers treating docker containers as first class citizens and some only supporting them. This is reinforced by some people claiming that nix is a better container builder then official tools like docker build.

After having analyzed our current documentation, and user demand we came to the conclusion that it would be highly beneficial for nix adoption and enabling newcomers to improve the documentation of those two areas.

Your project's scope:

- Gather existing incoherent/outdated docs from our manuals, wiki, guides, etc...
- Write new documentation about nix dockerTools and cross compilation support

> - Beta test the new documentation, fix sharp edges and add potential missing information about the most asked used cases. For this we will use our forum and social media presence to find all level of nix users and ask them to try the new docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reach out to Nix users of all experience levels on our forum and social media, ask them to test the new documentation, and incorporate feedback.
```

- Respond to the communities feedback and work on all the identified blind spots

> - Add release note entries, write announcement posts and finally publish the new documentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add release note entries, publish an announcement
```

- Delete the old documentation and link to the new one where appropriate

Work that is out-of-scope for this project:

> - We will not refactor documentation bits that aren't directly related to the mentioned topics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Refactoring parts of documentation that aren't directly related to the mentioned topics
```

> - We will not add automatic documentation tests since that is a very large project on its own and missing in many more places than the mentioned topics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adding automatic documentation tests, since that is a large project on its own
```

> - Working on version specific docs is out of scope since the API's for said topics are stable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Working on version-specific documentation, since the API's for said topics are stable
```

> We already approached some potential technical writing candidates, but none of them are able to commit until we have a confirmed budget.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We already approached some candidates for technical writing , but none of them are able to commit until we have a confirmed budget.
```

> As mentioned in the budgeting plan below, we are looking for two candidates, one per topic. One of the candidates for the docker documentation is @adamcstephens on GitHub, he has a lot of experience with container technologies and already know's his way around nixpkgs and related tooling. As for volunteer's @Janik-Haag would be willing to work on upcoming tasks, including the ones from the budget item justification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the budgeting plan below, we are looking for two candidates, one per topic. One of the candidates for the docker documentation is @adamcstephens, he has a lot of experience with container technologies and already knows his way around Nixpkgs and related tooling. As for volunteers, @Janik-Haag would be willing to act in a supporting role, including the activities listed in the budget item.
```

> Measuring the project's success:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Measure of success
```

> Nix has a repository called nixpkgs which is our official package collection.
> It includes packages such as libraries and programs, but also nix helper for building software.
> Every package in this repo gets build by our ci and the build artifacts are uploaded to our binary cache (https://cache.nixos.org).
> If someone now was to cross compile something using nix tooling, nix would go and fetch the needed builder from the binary cache.
> We measure the number of cache hits per entry using our content delivery network provider.
> 
> We would consider the cross compilation documentation successful if cache hits for said builder have a noticeable up tick in relation to overall nixpkgs usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nixpkgs includes packages such as libraries and programs, but also helper tools for building software.
Every package in this repository gets built in continuous integration, and the build artifacts are uploaded to a public binary cache.
If someone was to cross compile something, Nix would fetch the platform-specific dependencies from the binary cache.
We measure the number of cache hits per entry using our content delivery network provider.

We would consider the cross compilation documentation successful if
- Cache hits for cross-compilation dependencies have a noticeable uptick in traffic in relation to overall Nixpkgs usage
- Traffic on the docker guide increases significantly
```

> Measuring the success of docker build tools is a bit more tricky since everything nix needs to build docker images is basically gnu-coreutils and python with it's stdlib.
> This means a rise in cache hits for python and coreutils as result of better dockerTools documentation would basically be indistinguishable from for example a large company adopting nix as their primary build tool.
> What we can do instead is plot a chart of https://github.com/search?q=lang%3Anix+dockerTools&type=code and compare if the dockerTools usage goes up in relation to overall nixpkgs usage.
> 
> We would consider the docker documentation successful if there is an exponential dockerTools usage increase compared to before and with relation to general nixpkgs usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Measuring the success of improving documentation for `dockerTools` is a bit more tricky, since Nix uses no special dependencies to build Docker images.
This means a rise in cache hits for Python and Coreutils as result of better `dockerTools` documentation would be indistinguishable from a large company adopting Nix as their primary build tool.
What we can do instead is plot a chart of [`dockerTools` usage](https://github.com/search?q=lang%3Anix+dockerTools&type=code) and check if it goes up in relation to overall Nixpkgs usage.

We would consider the docker documentation successful if
- There is an substantial increase in use of `dockerTools` compared to before and  relation to general Nixpkgs usage.
- Traffic on the `dockerTools` guide increases significantly
```

> Timeline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Timeline
```

> | Dates            | Action Items                                       |
> | ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Dates | Action Items |
| - | - |
```

> | May              | Orientation / Gather existing documentation pieces |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| May | Orientation / Review existing documentation |
```

> | June - September | Write documentation                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| June - September | Write guides and update reference documentation  |
```

> | October          | Cleanup existing docs                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| October | Incorporate feedback and run evaluation |
```

> | November         | Project completion                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| November | Write and publish project report |
```

## Budget

> | Budget item        | Amount | Running Total | Notes/justifications                                                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Budget item | Amount [USD] | Running Total [USD] | Notes                                                                                |
```

| ------------------ | ------ | ------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Technical Writer   | 8000   | 8000          | 2 People x 4000 each, one person for the docker task, and one person for the cross compilation task |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Technical Writer | 10000 | 10000 | 2 People x 5000 each, one person each topic |
```

> | Volunteer stipends | 500    | 8500          | 1 Person, doing evaluation, gathering performance data, organizing/hiring technical writers         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Volunteer stipends | 500 | 10500 | organisation, evaluation, hiring technical writers, reporting |
```

| Total | | 10500 | |

## Additional information

Previous experience with technical writers or documentation:

> @Janik-Haag did the [technical writing one introduction](https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one) course by Google and thus is aware of what to look for when reviewing documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@Janik-Haag took the Google [Technical Writing One introduction](https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one) course and thus is aware of what to look for when reviewing documentation.
```

> | Total              |        | 8500          |                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Total              |        | 10500          |                                                                                                     |
```

> @Janik-Haag did the technical writing one introduction course by Google and thus is aware of what to look for when reviewing documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@Janik-Haag did the technical writing for an introduction course by Google and thus is aware of what to look for when reviewing documentation.
```

Author: the course name is technical writing one introduction, I'll put a link to https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one so it get's obvious.

> They also used the knowledge gained in said course to write documentation about platform operations at one of their previous jobs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They also used the experience from that course to write documentation on platform operations at one of their previous jobs.
```

> We also have a documentation team they work on the general documentation framework, webpages, styling, etc... but also make sure to keep existing docs up to date and deprecate outdated things.
> But they usually do not have time to add large chunks of new documentation since everyone in the docs team works on a volunteer basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also have a documentation team that works on documentation contents and infrastructure.
They do not have time to add large chunks of new documentation, but can help with reviews and sharing experience.
```

Previous participation in Google Season of Docs, Google Summer of Code or others:

> - We organize Summer of Nix in collaboration with the NLNet Foundation, which is a program that was inspired by Google Summer of Code. For more information about Summer of Nix see https://github.com/ngi-nix/summer-of-nix or the 2023 announcement post https://discourse.nixos.org/t/summer-of-nix-2023/27067

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We organize [Summer of Nix](https://github.com/ngi-nix/summer-of-nix) in collaboration with the NLNet Foundation, which is a program that was inspired by Google Summer of Code.
```

> - And we are participating in this year's Google Summer of Code as a mentoring org

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- And we are participating in Google Summer of Code 2024 as a mentoring organisation
```

## Problem statement

One of the superpowers enabled by the Nix ecosystem is creating outputs for multiple platforms (Linux, macOS, FreeBSD), architectures (x86, aarch64, RISC-V, etc.) and formats (statically linked binaries, Docker/OCI-images, APKs, appimages, and many more) from a single, concise recipe written in a functional programming language.
Unfortunately, the process for building anything but native binaries is barely documented, and the existing guides are out of date.

The recent spike in CPU architecture diversity in common settings created a higher demand for cross compilation support. And OCI images became the de facto standard to share software between platforms.

> Nix tooling excels at cross compilation, and arguably Nix is a better container builder then Docker. Google Analytics show that the most sought-after topics on our official resources are instructions to build a Docker container from a Nix package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nix tooling excels at cross compilation, and arguably Nix is a better container builder then Docker. The Google Search Console shows that the most sought-after topics on our official resources are instructions to build a Docker container from a Nix package.
```
